 
A neurotransmitter is a chemical messenger that allow nerve cells to communicate with 
each other. A neurotransmitter signal travels from a  neuron , across the synapse , to the 
next neuron. The synapse is the name giv en to the space between the two neurons.  
Neurotransmitters are important in boosting and balancing signals in the brain and for 
keeping the brain functioning. They help manage automatic responses such as breathing and 
heart rate, but they also have psychological functions such as learning, managing mood,  fear, 
pleasure, and happiness.  
 
How Neurotransmitters Work  
In order for neurons to send messages via neurotransmitters, they need to communicate with 
each other, which they do through synapses.  
When signals travel through a neuron and reach the end of that neuron, they cannot simply 
travel through to the next one. Instead, the neuron must trigger the rele ase of 
neurotransmitters, which then carry signals across the synapses with the goal of reaching the 
next neuron.  
 
During synaptic transmission, the action potential (an electrical impulse) triggers the 
synaptic vesicles of the pre -synaptic neuron to rele ase neurotransmitters (a chemical 
message).  
These neurotransmitters diffuse across the synaptic gap (the gap between the pre  and 
post-synaptic neurons) and bind to specialised receptor sites on the post -synaptic neuron.  
The neuron which released the neurotransmitters is called the presynaptic neuron. The neuron 
which receives the neurotransmitters is called the postsynaptic neu ron. 
The end of each neuron has presynaptic endings and vesicles, which are sacks containing 
neurotransmitters.  
When a nerve impulse (or action potential) triggers the release of neurotransmitters, these 
chemicals are then released into the synapse and the n is taken up by the receptors on the next 
neuron. This process is known as neurotransmission.  For Example  
Packets of serotonin molecules are released from the end of the presynaptic cell (the 
axon) into the space between the two nerve cells (the synapse).  These molecules may then 
be taken up by receptors of the postsynaptic nerve cell (the dendrite) and thus pass along 
their chemical message. Excess molecules are taken back up by the presynaptic cell and 
reprocessed.  
 
After Neurotransmission  
The neurotran smitters released from the presynaptic neuron may either excite or inhibit the 
postsynaptic neuron, telling it to either release neurotransmitters, slow down the release, or 
stop signaling completely.  
After neurotransmission, the signal is terminated, allowing the neurons to return to a resting 
state.  
When neurotransmitters get released into the synapse, not all are able to be attached to the 
receptors of the postsynaptic neuron. However, the gap between the neurons needs to be 
clearer of ne urotransmitters at signal termination.  
Therefore, the neurotransmitters either get broken down by enzymes, diffused away, or re -
uptake occurs.  
Re-uptake is a process whereby neurotransmitters get reabsorbed back into the presynaptic 
neuron they came from.  
After this process, they either get restored back into the synaptic vesicles until needed again, 
or they get broken down by enzymes.  
 
Classification  
A neurotransmitter can influence neurons in one of three ways: it can excite, inhibit, or 
modulate them.  
• Excitatory neurotransmitters  – these types have an excitatory/stimulating effect on the 
neurons. If a neurotransmitter is excitatory, it will increase the likelihood that the neuron 
will fire action potential. Examples of these types of neurotransmit ter are epinephrine 
and norepinephrine.  
• Inhibitory neurotransmitters  – in contrast to excitatory neurotransmitters, inhibitory 
neurotransmitters have the opposite effect, inhibiting/hindering the neurons. If a 
neurotransmitter is inhibitory, it makes the l ikelihood of the neuron firing action 
potential will be decreased. Examples of these types of neurotransmitter are GABA and 
endorphins.  
• Modulatory neurotransmitters  – these are often called neuromodulators. If a 
neurotransmitter is a neuromodulate, this me ans it can affect a large number of neurons 
at the same time, as well as being able to influence the effects of other 
neurotransmitters. Neuromodulators do not directly activate the receptors of neurons but 
work together with neurotransmitters to enhance t he excitatory or inhibitory responses 